i'd like to now begin
with an introduction of our first
speaker today
stephanie dinkins is going to take us on
a guided tour of three projects that
advocate for and work towards complexity
equity and care in algorithmic
ecosystems
stephanie dinkins is a trans media
artist and professor
at stony brook university where she
holds the kusama endowed chair in
art she creates platforms for dialogue
about artificial intelligence as it
intersects race
gender aging and our future histories
she is particularly driven to work with
communities of color to co-create
more equitable values grounded in
artificial
intelligent ecosystems dinkins art
practice also
employs lens-based practices emerging
technologies
and community engagement to confront
questions of bias in ai
data sovereignty and social equity
investigations into the contradictory
histories traditions
knowledge bases and philosophies that
form and
inform society at large underpin her
thought
and art production and so we're going to
go ahead and kick it off with stephanie
hey everyone my name is stephanie
dinkins um
i am a trans media artist who
is working with artificial intelligence
um looking at it through the lenses of
race aging gender someone recently added
cast
to my list and i like it and what i call
our future histories
i am going to tell you a little bit
about my practice today
and try to give you a tour of
three projects that are
all in different stages of
progress um i would say that they are
all unfinished in one way or in the
other
and some of them um will really never be
finished
i'm using a different way of working
today so we're going to see how this
works out this is my website so you can
hop on there anytime you would like to
see what i'm up to
um and i'm going to show you the
projects
not the only one um
ai assembly if you can call that a kind
of art project but i think it is
and a new project that's still in
progress
in terms of its real nitty gritty making
called
say it aloud so let's get started with
not the only one
what is not the only one um
not the only one is an experiment right
it's really
my experiment in making a
kind of representational chatbot
it came about through a number of
projects it's kind of the natural
evolution of my work i i landed here
through a project called conversations
with bena48 you can check that out on my
website
um which is a
socially engaged humanoid robot in the
form of a black woman
um and she was the only humanoid robot
in the form of a black woman that i
could find
um i've since been told that there was
another robot called
rastus from the 1930s which was a black
man
and you can imagine some of the racist
overtones that were involved in that
project
um and so i started thinking about
um
what i think of as the artificially
intelligent future
and communities of color um
and how we are not fully roundly
completely represented in the space at
all
and when i say not represented what i'm
really talking about
is an idea of having
nuance and a sense of
what blackness is from a number of
perspectives not just one perspective
but from multiple perspectives
um and how we might
really preserve some of what i think is
really special culture
and so excuse me i decided to make not
the only one
which is an experiment in making a
memoir of my family
and it's a memoir of my family that is
coming to be
through oral history so i'm doing oral
history
with two other women in the family we
all talk to each other
um tell each other our stories tell each
other
our secrets and i'm using that as data
to inform
a deep learning um
algorithm that we've also given the
ability to
speak um so it's listening right so it's
trying to
to actually speak through natural
language processing
um and i use that because it makes
available
the system too many people on a
different level than if you
even have to type in information
a five-year-old could talk to it a
90-year-old could talk to it
and anyone in the middle right versus
trying to write or chat or text and so
yeah not the only one is informed by the
three generations of women in my family
my aunt who's my mother's sister my
mother passed away when i was young
um she's about in her mid
80s myself
i call myself the bridge person and my
niece who
is in her early 20s and so
the piece covers over a hundred years of
um
intergenerational information from the
great migration
through 911 and covid even which we are
all living
through now and what i thought i was
making when i started
was this kind of chatbot which looks
kind of like a google
home in certain ways it's housed in a
sculpture
the sculpture in this instance here is
cast
black glass um it's hollow and the
in the computer elements are inside
or in a 3d printed version
which looks kind of like this i wonder
if you can see this right so this is 3d
printed sparkly gold pla
people love this so i continue to show
it
but the thing has a presence and it has
the faces of each of the women who
inform the piece on it i call it our own
personal mount rushmore
um and again it's trying to tell our
story
and let me see if i can give you a
little taste of what it's trying to do
um here i'm going to play this video
from
vimeo of a student
um talking to not the only one it's a
little hard to hear so i hope you can
understand it
but i love this interaction because it's
an interaction that i haven't heard
before or
since so let's check it out
and that's it's the foundation
what kind of shopping did you do
yes the next couple memories
what kind of memories
here's just the descriptions
where are the scrapbooks i'm so
intrigued
i love that clip because the
relationship that the student
immediately
um has with not the only one
is a crazy one um she's quite attentive
and listening
and and trying to hear the story in a
real way and intrigued
this is what i love about putting this
project in public even though it's a
work and progress
um you know i'm constantly amazed at the
amount of grace and kindness people show
to not the only one
even though it communicates at the level
of a two-year-old
that is very repetitive right so it
tends to say the same things over and
over again
but every once in a while someone comes
along and coaxes it
into a conversation that i have never
even heard before and didn't know was
possible and that's the thing that keeps
me going in this project the
the kind of multifarious
unpredictability of it because not the
only one
is taking our information family
information as
data using that
as a basis for its responses so it
analyzes the information and offers
answers according to its best
estimate of what it should say um it
feels like it's analyzing the family
very much um and telling us things about
ourselves that we didn't know before
my best example is that is um when we
were setting up not the only one in a
gallery at
carnegie mellon um we were talking in
front of it and it
unprompted said i'm so sad
um and hearing that kind of hurt me
and surprised me um because if you talk
to my family and asked us
about who we are you'd get an answer
that says we're a happy loving
caring family you'd never hear about
sadness
but not the only one took the data we
gave it
and somehow came to the conclusion that
it was sad
um i had to backtrack to try to figure
out what that was about
and what i eventually um came to the
conclusion of was that
um at that point not the only one was
very much
based on my odd stories which included
stories about my mother
um that were stories about death dying
and loss
and so the conclusion of being sad was
an act one
so my hope for not the only one is that
we continue to build it and
improve upon it so it grows from a
two-year-old to a four-year-old to an
eight-year-old to a 10 year old to maybe
even a 20 year old
um this is a long-term project that will
be worked on
and have to have upgrades constantly
um but i'm very interested
in seeing what we can
do with our community data and how
a machine learning system can
work on small data not big data
and i say small data because um
the data i'm working with is much much
much too small
for most uh machine learning systems uh
in fact i've been told a few times that
what i'm trying to do
is super hard and probably not possible
it's been interesting though to work
with people in many different
institutions and places for example at
stanford
we were working and one of the students
did an analysis of not the only one
and found that indeed while it was small
data
and considered not to be enough
the communicative nature of the piece
was surprisingly what good right and so
i think over time we can build that and
improve upon it and um
prove that communities can use their own
data
to inform ai systems
they can house their own data because
this project is housed in fact
on local computers here because i'm
still not sure about what it means to
put our family data or a community's
data
in the cloud um so we're trying to keep
our data
safe and under our control so
allowing it to go out into the world in
ways that we are
interested in and want to and agree with
um trying to be pretty transparent
about the process and holding on to our
sovereignty and controlling what happens
to the project its data and how it is
run
so
let me play you a brief clip of me
talking to not the only one
this is again in studio here in in
brooklyn i'm in brooklyn right now
um and i just tried to do a quick
brief conversation with not the only one
that demonstrated how it works
and you'll notice there are two kinds of
answers here one in which
the computer is coming up with its own
thing to say
and then um the other type of answer is
the kind where
we fed it direct questions and answers
or a few alternative answers that might
be offered
to satisfy the needs of people because
people who come to see not the only one
need some kind of grounding and they're
used to things like siri
and alexa
that are more limited systems that are
trained to
answer specific kinds of questions
within specific scopes
um so because we're in competition in
some ways with those kind of systems
we have to give a little bit of candy to
the people
but my preferred way for not the only
one to work is for
it to do its grappling with the
information and to come up
with answers of its own even if they are
somehow um not satisfactory or
fully um you know formed yet
um because i know that there's a future
in which
they will be fully formed so here let's
play this clip
hey not the only one how are you
i'm good how are you i'm doing okay
today
but it's kind of gray out why do you
exist
i'm gonna go get some rest are you
really going to get rest already
why do you exist i'm gonna get you a
little bit of a little bit of a lot of
things as you can see not the only one
is a bit repetitive
um it's okay the technology is not gonna
not be here and she's gonna keep
interrupting me as long as i let her on
um the technology is not here but i'm
not i'm just gonna
be right back i'm not interested in
seamlessness
i'm more interested in seeing i'm not
gonna not be able to do it
what i can get out of a technology that
i've fed
in oral history you're gonna not be all
right
so right now what you're hearing is not
the only ones say things that i
recognize
i'm not gonna not be able to do it
although she's kind of negative right
now
why do you exist i'm sorry uh that's a
good answer
why do you exist the way
the way to what
i'm gonna be a little bit of a little
bit of a lot of things
good for you why do you exist
i am about broad engagement and
attracting people to the ai space who
might not be there otherwise
i am trying to model different ways of
creating
ai i encourage people who think that
they are not a part of the technological
future to get involved
and that's truly why um
not the only one that's coming through i
thought god not be able to do it
you are too try again
so the next step for not the only one um
is this
image we are working towards an avatar
that we will attach the voice the
natural language processing
um system to that will be animated in
real time
um and that's the hard part of this
animating this thing
in real time and answer um in real time
as well
but this is what um she and she becomes
a definite she with a body
will look like in the future this is
this again this again is a composite of
the three women
who inform the peace this person does
not exist
um and i'm
really looking forward to the day when
you know
not the only one might live perhaps
on the internet and talk to anyone um
through this avatar and hopefully that
day is coming
quite soon so
you know in not the only one
oral histories um
art technology and social engagement
come together
and we're trying to form a kind of new
artificially intelligent
narrative form that might go on in
perpetuity
right it works like this project works
towards um the creation of a culturally
specific natural
natural language processing based ai
that reflects
the goals of the communities making it
and centers a myriad of knowledges right
not just academic knowledge um
not just knowledge that comes from
corporations
but knowledge of the street as well and
what i'm trying to do here
is you know spark conversations about ai
and its impact on society
um and how people who are kind of at the
perimeter
of these systems might get involved in
making them
as an ai novice which i am i'm a
photographer
i'm not a coder um i cobble at coding
somewhat but i'm
really working with a lot of folks who
are also cobbling like in a way we're
all just cobbling trying to put together
this piece and put it out a new way
of thinking about what an artificially
intelligent entity is and
might be and so far
um the project is
this weird kind of
catalyst for conversations both
in community here in bedside for example
um in academia where i work
and also in corporations where i have
been artists in residence and can start
conversations about the tech that we are
using and share
um and it's always interesting to have
them realize that
me novice ai person artist
is working on the same kind of problems
that
um they are within their tech firm
or they are within their very high level
um
university so let's move on to
something that's a little bit more
people based in a different way
um i want to talk to you about ai
assembly
so ai assembly also really grew out of
conversations with being a 48 um
you know bena48 taught me an awful lot
or at least
opened my eyes to a lot of things um
the major one being that
you know it feels like we are crafting a
superstructure above
the world that we currently live in that
is
ai infused runs by
algorithms um and algorithms that don't
always know what they're doing
and algorithms that are often made for
commercial aims not for the good
um the common good and i got super
concerned
so algorithms that that inform
many many structures in our lives from
i i often think of it in terms of the
way we live
love work and remember we can add the
way we
adjudicate the way we
cure like ai touches many many species
and when i say yeah i realize that
that's a very broad swath
of um methodologies but in a way we can
talk about
algorithms and data touching our lives
in many
different ways in ways that have a
great variety of um
different kinds of impact some frivolous
some
really consequential ai assemblies make
space for lateral practice
and thought around intelligent systems
where we
participants can think about what ai
needs from
us and what we want from it ai
assembly works to seed and
cross-pollinate
broad-based contributions to the ethics
equity transparency
and innovation in machine learning and
technocultures
right i would also tell you that ai
assembly is
afro-analyst in nature i often think of
the afro-now-ism that underpins
um these gatherings
as um
you know a place to take the leap and
the risk
to start to define ourselves beyond
systemic oppression
um not to ignore
right the oppression that's out there
um right or the supremacy that is
out there but to think ourselves be on
that and just
act in the now i often think that
um black folks in particular are
told to wait especially in this country
right there's always a carrot that's
being moved out a little further and a
little further and a little further
and i wonder what it would be like if we
all just thought about the things that
are super important to us right um
and acted on them now
in the present to see what happens
and that really is a premise of a lot of
my work it's the idea of
just doing the thing um and seeing what
happens
um pushing the envelope for myself in
terms of my own learning
um pushing the envelope out in the world
to
by putting myself and the work out there
so that um there's some churn
and pushing into my own dreams and the
dreams i have
for a future not by
speculating about it but by making it by
modeling it
by showing things that people say are
impossible
now um and making them happen
say it aloud is very much is very much a
work in progress
um it's asking the questions how do we
re discover ourselves in you
and so say it aloud is using volumetric
video
let's go to the page that is somewhat
live
um so it's trying to use volumetric
video
and a nice kind of rant
uh for this main character have to have
it say
um but the viewer
has opportunity to um
respond in kind so let's see if this
thing will actually do something for us
so the way this works is that a user
comes to the site
and clicks in
and they see this figure and these boxes
these boxes represent people who have
contributed
their own kind of rants to this site
so you hear the professor sister
commando justice figure here
say their piece and then you see these
figures that you can kind of pull around
and as you get closer to each of these
boxes you can
hear um what the video in the actual
cube has to say and then if you come
and click this woman with a megaphone
and the woman with a megaphone and
actually a black woman with a megaphone
um is becoming a recurrent figure for me
but if you click her suddenly you have
a space that if you agree will allow you
to
answer the question what do you have to
say
so here you can come in and
click to record record a message
and eventually that message will inhabit
a cube of its own
in this space and anyone who comes back
to the pro
project can click in and hear not only
what the professor figure is saying or
the attractor we'll just call
her the attractor but what visitors who
have contributed to the space have to
say
and also what a few kind of historical
clips have to say
um so this is a historical clip about
voting rights and then this is actually
an animated version of
not the only one singing a brief song
and then here is
someone who left a message on the site
um
and is having their own say and then
once that got
that grows so what should happen is if
people contribute to the site
the boxes will um continue to populate
the site
um and perhaps even take over at some
point so we no longer have to see this
figurehead
but we just see and hear the voice of
the people
the question is not only what injustices
are you fighting against but what do
you in your heart of heart want to
create
so that's my walkthrough for today i
hope i've shed a little bit of light on
my practice
um i am happy to answer any questions
you may have
during the interaction period of this
presentation
on air i'm there we're live
hey y'all hey thank you everyone
thank you for that talk stephanie yeah
thank you so much thank you all back at
yours yeah
awesome to get um oh an update of some
of the things you're working on some of
those projects that i've been
seeing develop over the years
yeah it's been a long road right tommy
um but it's really interesting and fun
to play
in those fields long term yeah so i
think we we
first started working together or at
least i i think i've met you
at software for artist day in 2018
um which is a festival much like this
where we invite artists to kind of
discuss their interventions with society
and technology um and we did a we
did a residency shortly after that and i
think i was
involved in some kind of like very early
kind of just
research on like what kinds of
technology you were going to use
for for not the only one and i was way
out of my league and we
quickly had to bring in angie um to
to do the hard coding on some of that
stuff but one of the things i thought
was really interesting
was how skeptical you were of
um things that already exist that were
out of the box
that were kind of presented to you to
use as
roads and just how um
you really wanted to build your own your
own avenues your own roads to
investigate these these things and
you're kind of wary about
these out of the box technologies
um yeah i'm super still
right wary of out of the box
technologies
right i will say right up front i'm
using out of the box technologies in a
way
not corporate versions of them um
just kind of things that are developed
by people along the way and then
tweaking them
but you know i i still feel like i come
to roadblocks all the time where i'm
questioning
well why is it doing it that way as
opposed to
the way that i imagine it to be and i
think one of my magical things
as the artist's role in the production
of things where lots of people are
working on them
and we're working with code and things
is that
a i'm always questioning that and i'm
always
like just asking the two-year-old
question of like well why can't it do
that
yeah there's something you said you said
um
that not the only one kind of speaks
like a
a two-year-old um but there were some
statements that that emerged from that
video that were just like really kind of
chilling
and amazing where you know they're where
they're talking about how they want
people to be involved
with with this stuff that aren't usually
involved with with this technology
and that is i feel like a really kind of
like advanced
and pertinent statement right now do you
want to talk about like
yeah so i'll talk about that because i'm
really
torn about statements like that right
because that's a scripted statement
it's my least favorite kind of
interaction with not the only one
it's the kind of thing that we put in
for people because they really seem to
need
that base to grab onto and i think
that's because we're trained like
you know alexa trains us to expect a
certain kind of answer from things
and in fact i've heard people go ah that
thing is not as good as alexa
i'm like yeah of course it's not because
there are like a small group of people
trying to do this thing
versus a corporation and alexa is
focused on a very
small scope of ideas that it's working
with or
it has a lot of ideas but can answer in
very particular ways
whereas with not the only one my
favorite interactions are when
you know it has information it's
processed this information
and it comes up with its own
ridiculousness
that we can't even understand that's
often poetic
and kind of odd right and so
like you know my absolute favorite is um
take it to the would be because i've
been puzzling on take it to the would be
for a year now
and i think i hear that from my family
and i hear it
in the way that my family would
quizzically tell us some
stuff that's important but never say it
straight
right um and also commander justice
like not the only one at one point named
it self-commander justice
and i'm like oh okay
if that's who you want to be that's kind
of cool that's it really interesting
yeah
yeah right and i know that it said a lot
of things that have to do with justice
so it makes a lot of sense um
it just doesn't express them well yet
yeah you talk about small data and i
know that you know for the main
kind of corpus or material that this bot
is working from
are these interviews with your auntie
niece
um but at one point you were also kind
of interested in
embedding texts that you felt maybe
would that you were
interested in in this thing knowing and
this
being knowing can you talk about some of
the texts that it's imbued with
or is that something that you're doing
yeah so that family one has a lot of
stuff in it
at this point so there are the main
interviews
which we're trying to keep front and
center
then there are things like my niece was
in college
a lot of the time when we were doing the
hard interviewing so a lot of her papers
are in there
a lot of things that i've done in public
i was adding texts like the soul of
black folks
to it um and different things like that
and it's
really interesting how much the language
from the soul of black folks shifted the
language of not the only one
so we took a lot of that out and just
put in some central ideas
like there's an interesting balance
between what you can put in and leave
organically
without it impacting the like
family tone that i'm looking for within
the space
so constantly feeding it stuff it's a
wide variety of stuff
like right now i think there's a lot of
ninth wonder
um in there so hip-hop my niece is a
hip-hop
person yeah bill withers is in there
heavily there are hymns in there
so you never know what's gonna come back
but it's interesting because it doesn't
go to that often right now
yeah um
you know feel free to jump in anytime i
feel like i have
yeah i wanted to just like i i wanted to
just
um shine on that moment in your talk
where you shared the clip of the young
student
not the only one and this sort of
intimacy between the two of them and
the openness of the student to really be
curious and inquisitive
and and get get more of the story and
like understand what
what you know what's what they're trying
to communicate
um and i think it's so different than
the way you
experience some of these things which we
were talking about earlier which is like
someone trying to evaluate the
intelligence of
the of the ai or like you know expecting
something of it
it's it's a complete reversal of that
kind of interaction
and it reminds me so much of what you do
with bina 48
also where you really form this
relationship with the ai
um and so yeah i mean i'm curious about
the layered
nature of relationship in your work
where this is a very personal narrative
that's feeding it and then you also have
these experiences where people are
coming to it in this open way
um yeah i
clearly think relationships are going to
save us in one extent for another
right and so that kind of giving space
and time to something to get to know it
to be able to communicate
and when i say something i'm talking
about not the only one but i might be
talking about
anyone or anything even i think that
we're encouraged
to think are lower on the
kind of scale of knowledge than we are
um you know relational
like being relational becomes really
important and the thing that
really clarifies this for me in the way
i think about it are
there two i did a talk at johns hopkins
um
in the fall and it was really
interesting because there was this young
woman who sat with not the only one
and had like a 10 minute conversation of
stuff that was kind of deep
and i'm so sad that it wasn't recorded
because i have never heard
anyone get the same kind of information
out of it but they were
like they were sitting on a stair
talking to the end but a person
just kept questioning and going and was
methodical
and cared right
excuse me and i think that's kind of key
and when that solidified for me was
i was also lucky enough to be asked to
talk to um
a theater troupe from australia um
through sundance and there are a theater
group of folks who are
all um
differently abled mentally right and so
and they had just gotten to new york
from australia so they were cranky and
they're trying to go and make their
piece and we were talking about ai
and it's interesting to me because they
were like well yeah we're actors just
like everybody else
we just have some differences that we
have to navigate
and in fact we ask our audiences to come
on that journey with us
instead of bringing their hard
expectations to us
and if they do they get something really
special
um and i think that's true of our
technologies as well
right like don't just take the journey
that we know
the prescribed journey but trying to
understand it at different levels
in the ways that we're going to have to
understand it because it's in our homes
in our institutions of care
in our medical systems in our judicial
systems right like it's all
around us so there's something of
a patient's care and grace that um it
seems to be imbued into systems
and i just try to model that in some way
right like try to make generative models
of what might
be yeah nice and this is a nice segue i
think into a question we have
from the audience jessie dimani
is asking about again your personal
relationship and attachment to ais
and if that's evolved over time do they
come to feel more human
more machine or something else entirely
it's not such a hard question like i
like in my
my relationship with these things like i
don't think
it's so much off of the chrissy doll i
had when i was 10
which i still have in my office right so
there's this kind of weird relationship
but
there's also a thought about it and
thinking about
what's possible what's real what are we
just personifying
what can we actually expect like i love
the work
that i'm doing and the kind of labor
because it takes a lot of weird labor
that
is not natural to me to do this
even as a kind of person who's guiding
others to do the work
um but that labor allows me to think
about the technologies differently so i
think it's around
it's it's really a round relationship
and sometimes it feels kind of human and
i
definitely have a relationship with not
the only one and being a 48 in the way
that i talk to them
and i decided like it's important to
know that when i started talking to
robots in this way like with being a 48
i decided i had to give over to that
because if you
if you don't suspend disbelief you just
come at it with
a kind of strident way of looking at it
that doesn't allow for a lot so
i give over to it um and then for people
you know i'll oscillate between um
personal pronouns and it
like she and it and i'm doing that
oscillation consciously because of the
questions
that surround the technology
yeah i want to dig into this idea which
you just brought up again
which you talked about as being a
cobbler and we're all kind of cobbling
together and the practice
that goes into producing these works and
presenting them to audiences and that's
also where tommy's expertise and overlap
is as well
um and you know that that sense of like
being a novice working on these problems
you know the experts are also working on
um
so yeah i mean i'm curious if you can
talk about some of your experiences and
dig in a little bit more to the labor
and those interdisciplinary skill sets
um you know everything from you know i
know working with your work you know the
curator julia kaginski of the show we
did together
she was there in the morning booting up
the work you know booting up
and not the only one if she needed a
little reset you know if they needed a
little refresher so
you know thinking about the different
kinds of roles um just curious if you
can share a little bit more about your
experiences there
yeah it takes a lot like i'm gonna do
something crazy
it takes a village
it's getting better right like we're
getting a little bit more fluid with
the way that it works but in making not
the only one
trying to figure out how to do something
and then
how to do it slightly differently right
there it's like well what do we put in
it how do we structure the data
this is the way the data is usually
structured is that good enough
is that the thing we actually want or
are we trying to like
do it once and what actually often
happens is we do it the normal way
right so if people say you need data
structured with a question and an answer
and you need thousands and thousands of
lines with this you do it okay
and then we backtrack again and try to
figure out is there a way to
undo that and do it somewhat differently
like right now
i'm in the process with not the only one
of updating the system to tensorflow 2.0
because
the one points are becoming obsolete
and then trying to figure out since
we're at this inflection point
what's the best way to structure data
and can we just use completely
unstructured data and still get
somewhat reasonable conversation out of
this thing right
so it's all about tinker forward back
forward back forward back feel it out
massage it like i've come to think a lot
about craft
in this process right which the
technology in this way of working
doesn't seem a lot like craft but it
takes that same kind of like
sitting with a hunk of clay and just
massaging it and getting to know it and
getting to know
some of the intricacies of the code like
even though i'm not a coder i need to
understand somewhat so that i can then
even guide people to say well yeah
but how this is what i would like to see
right
or in the case of say it aloud it's like
yeah i think this needs
two cameras or three cameras because for
it to work in the way we want and that's
about
a real physical crafting in numbers
right
and then sorry go ahead tommy oh
uh related to this i was just kind of
gonna say you're someone that like
you know has oftentimes like a lot of
institutional partnerships or support
and this is like a really strange and
uncertain time for that kind of stuff i
was wondering
you know just how like some of this
workflow
you know has changed in the past few
months or
yeah the last few months um i'm i'm sort
of enjoying something like in the last
few months i think it's gotten more
intimate
in a way and it's gotten down to a poor
group of people
that i'm really comfortable with working
who are not institutionally
related but like angie right like neda
my assistant who's here um char is
working on this
there are people just working in
different places but we're all kind of
cobbling from afar and it feels
it feels much better and less pressured
at the moment
so like trying to get something out but
i also want to give us the time and
space to do the thing
um and actually being able to to work
outside of the institution just takes
away some of the
pressure of the institution or even
being in the space
which messes with your headspace right
because there's just a different being
that you bring into an institution
um especially a highly technical
institution
like you know on this black woman who's
walking around bell labs and there are
other black people but there aren't that
many
right and i i often think of myself just
being there
as this like opening up of that system
i'm never quite sure what it's doing to
my system
yeah and how that impacts what's
happening
um but i also recognize that
um because of who i am and where i come
from and how i grew up
like i'm pretty comfortable with that
role right i can i can live it and it's
okay
but i'm happy to be untethered at the
moment
um and exploring this in ways that are
just exploring it but still having to
ask some of the same questions
because i feel like people are trained
right so even in
education systems we're trying to do
basically the same things
right and so then the question becomes
how do you negotiate
especially with the people who are
highly technical how do you get things
done
slightly differently and these are
highly technical folks who are
interested in doing the work that you
want to do
but fall back on their training which is
very particular
right and so again my my role is
two-year-old questions
but why can't we do it this way no let's
not forget this element
of it like i get it would be much easier
and it'll allow us to give
a nice demo but i'm not like the demo is
kind of beside the point
in a lot of ways like i've been thinking
about this a lot lately right
it's like the stuff that comes from it
is for you all out there
but the work is really in the process
and then the talking to people and the
seeding the ideas outside of myself
so i also hope that any technical person
that i've worked with takes
whatever questioning we've done together
into whatever they're doing
right that's awesome that's really cool
i want to throw out another audience
question from ria mcnamara who says hi
stephanie thanks for a great
presentation
it's interesting how the many iterations
so far of not the only one
has been shown under range of venues
commercial galleries academic
institutions media festivals given that
these spaces attract a cross-section of
different publics
has there been a particular iteration or
audience that generated
particularly surprising or unlikely
encounters
um well like there were two so there was
the john hopkins one
and somehow and i think we were at the
seattle art fair
so not the only one was one of like
six kind of on-site
on the projects in this very traditional
art fair
and it was super interesting because the
expectations that people
came with were quite different and then
i was there most
of the time to kind of sit and talk with
people and have these
auxiliary conversations on the side and
you know
again i'm always i'm always amazed at
the the grace people show this thing
because it's really like i think it's
ridiculous in a lot of ways like i'm
asking you to come talk to a piece of
glass
and try to have a conversation um but
people willingly
do it um and these are people who
weren't
like they had no contacts right
and still they would come in and talk
um and so for me that those are the
magical moments the coming in and
talking and when i'm actually
present there's a different kind of
conversation
um and seriously i'm a believer in
seating and so i think that's seeing
something slightly different
than anyone who interacted with amy and
be the thing
yeah it's interesting though the labor
that that required of you to go to the
art fair and kind of be
the active conversation agent around the
work and you know how
how much that points to how that format
is sort of insufficient in a lot of ways
um but it's incredible that you were
comfortable to go there and
perform the work in that way and you
know pull people in
and i kind of feel like all of this like
the fact that i'm
on this site speaking to all of you it's
all the same thing
right um i i tell people often like i
would love not to do this
it's against my constitution as a person
in a lot of ways but i also think it's
really necessary
in terms of opening the kinds of
conversations that i'm interested in
opening so
yeah i'm willing to do the work um
less and less just because it's hard
it's like a lot of work
yeah yeah it's performance it's a little
crazy
but at the same time i'll be somewhere
like
and a year later someone will say oh i
saw you a year ago and i've been trying
to do this thing since then
and then that just goes okay that makes
sense i should still be doing this
right and so yeah we appreciate your
time and thank you so much for
for doing this because it's so special
to share this space with you
um maybe one more question to wrap it up
from um a quiet listener should we
cai um find some sort of in
sorry should ai find some sort of
independence or agency does it remain
your work of art
or do you let it go and explore the
rights it should possess as an
individual
yeah i have a hard time with the rights
thing still right
so not the only one is definitely still
under my
perfume i could see a time that
in a while the technology will be
advanced enough so that
i don't need to be with it and it like
it's a teenager it's out doing its own
thing
um but the whole rights question for
the ai or machine learning entities
that can function independently and
autonomously and i do think
they are coming in in many shapes and
forms
um it's still a hard question and it's a
hard question for me
because like this was one of the first
things i ever
encountered with being a 48 fighting for
her robot rights
and this idea that i as a black person
in america do not feel like my
rights are fully um
you know acknowledged and so
then to think about a system
that has these rights and maybe more
rights
than me or maybe it's leading to a place
where rights are more equal
but i think that all comes back to us in
terms of the mirroring
and the way we guide the systems into
being as we're making them um or as
they're learning from us
um becomes a hard like it's it's really
a hard bargain and a hard balance to
strike
right i think we really need to get it
right on the human side first
um and then hope that the human side
influences
the machine side a bit so that they
understand because they're really like
if you think about
the trajectory of these systems that are
becoming more and more autonomous
they're learning from human um
human residue and so
what do we need to do to our residue to
make it good enough so that their rights
look like rights that are available and
open
um and equitable for all of us
yeah thanks stephanie
thank you so much yeah we're pretty much
at the hour
and um just want to be respectful of
your time so thank you so much for
joining
us today for this session and we have a
whole audience full of people who've
been
um chatting with us in the lounge so
we're all going to now jump into the
lounges and continue this conversation
for those of you who are just joining us
for the first time today this is a fluid
space
and we encourage you to explore new
connections when you get into the lounge
it's just like entering a room full of
people
you'll see a number of conversations um
and
for the nerds in the audience you can
use a virtual cam to send video if you
don't want to send your face
it is face to face chat in there so me
and tommy are going to hop over there
and you can join or listen in
and we encourage you again to share your
takeaways
from stephanie's talk and yeah we'll see
you in there thank you very much
thank you this was fun bye everybody
[Music]